---
layout: page
title: Editing as metareading
---

We've seen that for all their differences, the different types of scholarly editing — and of editing more broadly — are united by a common process: bringing forth something new from something already in existence.

We might also say that the varieties of scholarly editing all involve a certain way of reading.

We'll call this way of reading *metareading*. By metareading, we mean a way of reading focused less on what a text _says_ than on what it _is_. To clarify, let's contrast metareading with some other, more familiar kinds of reading.

*Close reading* is a central practice in literary study and the humanities generally. Barbara Herrnstein Smith points out that the term "refers not only to an activity with regard to texts but also to a type of text itself: a technically informed, fine-grained analysis of some piece of writing, usually in connection with some broader question of interest" ("What Was Close Reading," p. 58). She goes on to point out that the "practice has multiple ancestors, including classical rhetorical analysis, biblical exegesis, and legal interpretation, and it also has some cousins, such as iconology and psychoanalysis." 

Smith offers a quick sketch of how the practice has developed in academic literary studies since the 1920s in order to reflect on its relationship to what some digital humanists call *distant reading*: a way of reading that uses the power of computation to surface meaningful patterns across vast multitudes of texts, as in Franco Morretti's computer-assisted analysis of seven thousand novel titles from the mid-eighteenth to the mid-nineteenth century.

N. Katherine Hayles uses the term *machine-reading* for this kind of macroscopic approach, contrasting it both with *close reading* and with *hyperreading*, a term she borrows from James Sosnoski and then expands, using it to cover not only the kind of rapid scanning, skimming, and link-following that readers do when using a search engine but the traditional scholarly practice, in archival research, of sifting through "a great deal of material quickly to find the relevant texts or passages" ("How We Read," 496). 

In her pencil history of close reading, Smith observes that its first influential adherents in the twentieth century, the so-called New Critics, set their practice consciously in opposition to the dominant one of the century's early years, in which "the study of literature consisted largely of the production, transmission, and acquisition of facts about sets of texts," including "titles, publication dates, and sources" of major works, and "readily observable features that distinguished forms, styles, and genres (the medieval romance, the Petrarchan sonnet, the Jacobean drama, and so forth)" (60). 

It's this largely descriptive, empirical approach to texts that we have in mind when we use the term *metareading* here. Practiced as an end in itself, with a mistaken confidence that there are "facts" about literary texts — or about anything in the realm of culture — that one can simply "observe," metareading can indeed end up treating texts as what Smith calls "dusty achievements." But practiced with nuance and as a means to other ends — from the relatively uncomplicated, such as making texts findable, to the highly complicated, such as reaching a nuanced understanding of texts in relation to their contexts — it's a powerful, indeed essential, tool.

Without metareading there would be no library databases (or their predecessors, card catalogs), bibliographies, or citations (footnotes and endnotes). These are all essential scholarly aids precisely because of the empirical data about texts that's stored in them and the regularized way in which the data's been recorded. Carefully constructed bibliographies and properly formatted citations enable scholars to verify other scholars' sources and pursue new directions for research because of the information they contain regarding such mundane details about a text as its author, title, publisher, publication date, and perhaps the title, volume number, issue, and page numbers of the journal in which it was published.

But without metareading, there would also be none of the rich interpretive discussion that we find in sophisticated literary close readings that turn on questions of genre. If we claim that a text represents an instance of a type such as *novel, romance, epic, lyric, pastoral, tragedy, satire, magic realism*, or *speculative fiction*, here again we're making a statement about what the text *is*. In this case, the statement isn't a mere observation but rather a critical judgment, and one with the power to completely re-order our understanding of what the texts *says*. 

Without metareading, we'd have no way to understand a text's meaning or cutural significance in relation to its publishing history (did the author make changes to later editions?), its material self-presentation (three-volume novel or inexpensive, paperbound numbers in a serial?), or its treatment of paratextual features such as the title page (did it display the author's real name? a pseudonym? "Anonymous"? no name at all?).

We'd have no way to think about the text in relation to its date (or dates) of publication and everything else that was going on at that moment in the author's life or the world at large. 

## Metareading and metadata

One might say that the kind of information we're attending to when we're metareading is *metadata*. It's information *about* the objects humanities scholars study. If it seems like a coldly scientific or inappropriately quantitative term to apply to objects as profoundly moving and richly meaningful as, say, the plays of Shakespeare, consider that on the whole it doesn't bother the librarians, archivists, and curators who preserve and organize these objects so that we can study and appreciate them. That's in part, no doubt, because these individuals increasingly rely on computer systems to store and access the information that makes these objects findable and registers the connections among them. The objects themselves needn't feel diminished by recognizing the information about them as metadata. Meanwhile, that recognition is likely to improve our ability to use the computer-driven search tools that sort and filter the metadata to help us find what we're looking for.

## Metareading and scholarly editing

As we've already seen, though, metareading isn't something done only by those who build catalogs and databases, or write bibliographies and citations. Literary critics do it, whether consciously or not, when they ask (or make assumptions about) what a text is in their effort to understand what it says. 

Scholarly editors are metareaders, too, and highly conscious of it. Rather than recording and organizing information about texts or explicating them based on assumptions or claims about their identity, however, scholarly editors are most often looking to *establish* information about a text so that they can decide how to represent that text in an edition. For example:

- Who authored “A Visit from St. Nicholas” (aka “’Twas the Night Before Christmas”), published anonymously in 1837. It's usually attributed to Clement Clark Moore, but not everyone agrees. See [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Visit_from_St._Nicholas). (Scroll down to "Authorship controversy.")
- What title should be used for Henry David Thoreau's essay variously printed as "Resistance to Civil Government," "On the Duty of Civil Disobedience," or simply "Civil Disobedience"? (See [this note to Thoreau’s essay](https://commons.digitalthoreau.org/civil/a-note-on-the-text/), particularly [the second paragraph](https://commons.digitalthoreau.org/civil/a-note-on-the-text/#pTtdosftoWGpafthieRPvWHDTPUPFietrtaaaphcHWRpoNCEWCDaOsslsvarWshtrtiu) and [this note on the paragraph](https://commons.digitalthoreau.org/civil/a-note-on-the-text/#comment-6)).
- What's the best way to represent Emily Dickinson's poetry to readers? Virtually all of Dickinson’s poetry was unpublished — in the conventional sense — in her lifetime. She shared and circulated her poems among different people in different handwritten forms. Printed versions of her poetry often make changes to her original spelling and punctuation. Should they? In addition, as [this effort to construct a critical edition of Dickinson’s correspondences](https://rotunda.upress.virginia.edu/edc/preface.xqy) points out, reading the poems outside their original context can affect how we understand them:

> Published translations of Emily Dickinson’s manuscripts homogenize her various writings so that all letters appear to be of the same ilk, as do all poems. Editions that divide letters from poems and poems from letters elide important aspects of the positions of Dickinson’s poems within epistolary contexts and vice versa. Emily Dickinson blended or embedded poems into the prose in letters; wrote them on separate sheets and enclosed them with letters; wrote poems and sent them as letters, with salutation and signature. In other words, Dickinson’s poems are often part of letters, and poems are often letters or are contextualized by their mutual enclosure in an envelope with a letter. But these poems, letters, and letter-poems are difficult to comprehend when they are stripped from their original context.