---
layout: page
title: Metareading and metadata
---

In the previous module, we suggested that the humanities are a space rich in things — paintings, sculptures, buildings, books, letters, manuscripts, and so on — and that the *textual* things humanists deals with (such as novels, plays, poems, journals, essays, and the like) are themselves rich in things, some of them material (book covers, for example, or graphic illustrations), some of them conceptual (such as characters and metaphors), some of them structural (titles, chapters, paragraphs, lines, stanzas, etc.).

To engage in the kind of reading we've called [metareading](/introduction/editing-as-metareading) is to attend to texts as things and the things in texts. To build a catalog or database of texts is to employ a systematic nomenclature for describing text-things and things-in-texts so that, among other things, you can identify and sort the texts by the kinds of things they are or contain. To practice scholarly editing is, at a minimum, to bring forth from one or more versions of a text an edition that not only delivers the text's content but also carefully describes the text as a thing and the things in the text. This careful description, we said earlier, is not simply a process of recording observations; it requires judgment and interpretation. 

A digital scholarly edition treats all these things as data and *encodes* the data using a standardized descriptive language that can be read by a computer. There are a variety of such languages, known generically as *markup*. HTML ("Hyptertext Markup Language") is one. XML ("eXtensible Markup Language") is another. As its name suggests, XML's great virtue is that it can be stretched to accommodate new uses. In fact, XML is a general-purpose markup language that can itself be used to create markup languages by defining the terms of those languages.

XML is the preferred markup language for digital scholarly editions because it gives editors the ability to describe textual data using a combination of widely used descriptive terms and highly particular terms invented to suit the needs of an individual project. Even these project-specific terms will be readable by a computer because XML gives editors the ability to point, in their marked-up files, to a sort of lexicon where the terms have been defined. 

If this all seems very abstract, don't worry. What's important to see, for now, is that marking up texts-as-things and the things in texts in a standardized, computer-readable language creates a layer of descriptive data "above" these things that can be sorted and otherwise manipulated by software for a variety of purposes: to determine how the text should appear on a screen, for example, or to extract some of the textual data for presentation in charts and tables, or to search textual data for interesting patterns.

We can think of markup, in this sense, as a kind of *metadata*: data about textual data. It's logical that the result of metareading would be metadata: a systematic description of what we're seeing when we approach a text in an effort to understand what it is.